hey everyone Laszlo Montgomery here with
CHP episode 164 this is the fourth
installment in our little overview of
the life of Joe and lie and talking
about Joe and lie I can't help but
revisit many of the same stories and
events from past episodes this time in
part four we're gonna pick up in July
1943 when Joe and I was recalled back to
yen on this was all covered in more
detail that I'm gonna offer you today in
the back to back John service and
Chinese Civil War series that was CHP
episodes 115 to 120 - we also discussed
this period in the conch on CHP 11
episode and in the award-winning eight
part dunk shopping series so I don't
think we need to rehash everything in
detail yet again what a rip-roaring time
this was especially looking at it in
hindsight from the American perspective
this period we're looking at today 1943
to 1949 what a multitude of stars
FDR Henry Wallace vinegar Joe George
Marshall Patrick Hurley John's service
and the whole Dixie mission and of
course Stalin and of a China side Zhang
Kai shek and the songs and the entire
pantheon of CCP leaders and greats from
Mao on down all playing roles and one
central drama in central to this central
drama wherever the action was happening
was Joe and lie now at this point it had
already been about eight years since the
CCP set up the party center in yen on in
northern Shaanxi province Joe had been
working daily with Mao and political
military foreign relations and
organizational affairs if you figure it
was around 1935 when Joe hitched his
wagon a mile for keeps quite a lot of
time had passed and their working style
was very developed by now in 1940's yen
on Mao was by then the unchallenged top
guy after two anyi he rose to the top
but he still had contenders
one such contender wah
it had always been Joe and lye we
already established back in part one Joe
wasn't a dictatorial type or
power-hungry but even so he was a very
respected senior party leader and had a
very impressive CV he may not have had
aspirations to lead in the sense that
mah-jong quoi beaucoup Wang Ming and
others did but his words mattered and
carried a lot of weight while couldn't
push Joe and light round or take him
down by himself so we left off last time
with Joe's recalled a yen on in July
1943 the yen on rectification movement'
or campaign was at its peak the whole
movement was all about Mao consolidating
his power and taking a first organized
stab at rooting out all his enemies and
suspected enemies when the last body was
counted about 10,000 people were put
away this was the first ideological mass
movement to the Chinese Communist Party
and it wouldn't be the last
just prior to Joe's arrival and yen on
the Comintern had been dissolved that
tortured organization for years tried
and failed to assert its control over
the levers of power in the CCP Stalin
tried but he never took mouse seriously
and like all great leaders do from time
to time he didn't play his cards right
had to pay a price when his guy bought
gu and later wang ming didn't take the
top spot Mao and Stalin may have been
brothers and Marxism Leninism but they
were never good friends in fact they
couldn't stand each other
Stalin was 15 years older than moe so
the Comintern folded as we discussed
last episode Joe had convinced Stalin in
1939 to get on board with Chairman Mao
in the current CCP leadership slate and
when Stalin caved that meant the
opposing Comintern line led by Wang Ming
were thrown under the bus and defamed
but that wasn't enough for Mao wasn't
enough to win all those comrades who
were too late placing their bets
and to come in for a little examination
by the party the process you had to go
through was pretty harsh man it involved
a lot of self-criticism and criticism
from others and as I said 10,000 people
didn't survive the process so so how you
feared when it was your turn to take
that walk of shame and get put through
the wringer determined not only your
future in the party but whether you
lived or join the 10,000 so Joe had to
take his turn like everyone else and in
the grand scheme I'm like comrades like
Leo xiaochi boy boy and Poong Jun as far
as Mossad Joe was a little late in
accepting his leadership in the party we
all know how he signed up in 1935 but
prior to that Joe sort of played it both
ways and could be said to have at times
supported the 28 Bolshevik Comintern
line so Joe had to pay a penalty for
cavorting at one time with Wang Ming Joe
also faced criticism for other past acts
both Joe and Chagny for example had to
answer for their handling of
intellectuals Joe himself had because of
his education and ere you dition had
always been pigeon-holed as an
intellectual it was no secret that he
had come to the defense of more than one
Jew sure fun suit though it wasn't his
fault that the whole thing went down
like it did he also got a tongue lashing
for the outcome of the new Fourth Army
incident in January 1941 it was a rough
six weeks for Chou Enlai but he knew how
to handle these things he kept his head
at all times you know what to say
Mao really wanted to make sure that
those comrades like Joe who came a
little late to his side were totally
signed up Joe survived the ordeal you
may recall from the Cong hung episode
Mao have allowed Cong to really turn up
the heat as far as going after any
possible naysayers so out of control and
violence was kung Hong's 10 month reign
of terror that Mao had to step in and
tell Kong Shum and knock it off and not
only that my apologize for his friends
behavior you see Joe and I wasn't the
only one who had complete loyalty into
Oshin amounted on so did Kang Xiang and
it was thanks to Kang Xiang Mao got to
ditches saintly third wife hoods a Jun
and acquired the Shanghai movie star LAN
ping aka Li Shu bong aka
Lee goon huh aka Chongqing when all the
top comrades in the CCP told their
leader she was not Madame Mao material
Kang Sheng made it easy for Mao to
rebuff his closest comrades
so cun got off with a slap on the wrist
for his overly enthusiastic prosecution
of his fellow comrades during the yen on
rectification movement' by the time the
whole thing wound down the all-powerful
all-knowing chairman mao we have all
come to know was born not only did he
emerge from this rectification movement
as the undisputed leader and figurehead
for the whole CCP movement his Mao
Zedong Thought a term coined by Wang
Shao Qiang in 1943 became the guiding
light of the party and it's about here
where the seed got planted that led to
the deification of Mao that reached its
apex in the Cultural Revolution right
about here it started to plant roots the
next big item on the agenda after this
was all over was the United States
yeah 1943 we know it's coming this is
where my fellow American skis clumsily
walk into this quagmire of a political
situation world war two was at its
halfway point about now and America was
fighting wars in both Europe and the
Pacific and China was key to the war in
the Pacific the belief was that the
Chinese military had to keep Japan tied
down fighting they could not allow the
Japanese military to advance any further
than they already had defeat was not an
option and Uncle Sam had to do whatever
they could to keep China in the war and
support them in their efforts against
the Japanese aggressors a great help was
lend-lease that had been turned down in
March 1941 that turned into one of the
great profit centers of all time for
those favorably placed along the supply
chain and foremost John's
servus episodes we all know how that
went as early as 1943 Joe and I already
knew every effort must be made to woo
the Americans and get some of that
lend-lease supplies heading in yen ins
direction
Joe understood the politics and how the
media was reporting the war in China the
narrative that Jang wasn't getting the
job done was already an old story there
was regular talk about Jang and his
cronies pocketing all these proceeds
from black market and u.s. lend-lease
aid and not taking the fight to the
Japanese Joe knew this well-worn
narrative was right for political
exploitation remember the second United
Front had already broken down but the US
was gonna pull out all the stops to do
the impossible and drive the two
opposing parties to join together to
fight Japan in this Joseon opening he
skillfully played up the Communists
unfettered support for the notion of
fighting Japan he saw how the Americans
were pointing their fingers at Jang and
stamping their feet so it became even
more important for the communist armies
to carry out actions that could be
pointed to later on as proof to the
Americans when they came that the
Communists could be a serious and
reliable ally and all along while jion
was sitting on his hands they were
taking the fight to the Japanese and so
began the whole tortured but thoroughly
entertaining period of the Dixie and
Marshall missions the Dixie mission ran
July 22nd 1944 to March 1st 1947 George
Marshalls
ill-fated mission ran concurrently with
the Dixie mission from December 20th
1945 until January 1947 it was only
natural that the party leader chosen to
spearhead this effort to obtain American
aid and support be Joe and lye all his
experience dealing with Western people
and the training going back to his
Europe days had well prepared him for
what lay ahead a lot of American
military and political figures will be
meeting him and talking to him it seemed
at least up till 1943 that whoever met
Joe and I liked him immediately the
overwhelming majority if not
all of the Western people who got to
meet him we're either intellectuals or
political figures over the past couple
decades Joe had perfected his style he
was very charming
disarming persuasive and effective but
this really was a mission impossible
and we all know of course from past
episodes that indeed it was an
impossible mission Joe had more faith
than Mao did as far as winning some sort
of recognition from the Americans but
Mao knew and Joe knew about halfway into
the Marshall mission that the Americans
as well-meaning as they were just didn't
understand the politics or the current
dynamic in China they had to choose one
it was either choice a john kai-shek and
the KMT government or it was be mild
said dong and the Communists and Joe and
I knew from everything that had happened
since 1927 that the Americans through
their actions were always a hundred
percent of the time lined up behind the
KMT they never once purposely sided with
the CCP June 1944 around the time of
d-day Joe invited a gaggle of reporters
up to yenna
to come check out and see for themselves
what a great bunch the Communists were
well easier said than done June 1944
were still thick in the Chongqing period
and chose life he's still operating out
in the open in Chongqing by mutual
agreement forced upon Jung as a direct
result of the Sheehan incident the
Communists operated openly in Chongqing
but they were constantly harassed and
the more important ones were always
followed there was always a detail
assigned to Joe but no attempts have
been made to take him out after all
everyone knew was mostly things to Joe
and ly that John was still alive so
Frick Jang to return the favor by having
Joe Enlai assassinated that really would
have been bad form Joe had been gone
from yen on for 15 months during this
time in Chongqing as the communist
representative he operated the southern
Bureau of the party and with the heat on
Joe all the time
it wasn't easy to achieve what he did
with respect to propaganda being the
acceptable face of the CCP recruitments
infiltrating KMT departments and
agencies running the occasional black op
he was busy but he wasn't too busy to
make time to see vice president Henry
Wallace when he came a call and in June
1943 this was how it all got started he
recalled from those john service
episodes the drumbeat became so
excruciating ly loud calling on the u.s.
to go see the communists that roosevelt
if they're still well strong
recommendation told his vice president
henry wallace to go take a look-see
young was able to put the kibosh on
those Western journalists going up to Y
n on to go listen to a bunch of CCP
propaganda but where FDR was concerned
he still couldn't say no to him but when
Wallace stopped by Chongqing in June
1944 John gave him an earful he was in a
foul mood because all the promises made
to him by FDR and Cairo had evaporated
but when Wallace insisted that some kind
of American observer mission be allowed
to visit yen on John had to surrender to
the inevitable keeping the Americans and
communists apart in any official kind of
capacity was one of Jung's main missions
Jung understood the Americans well
enough to know that they probably fall
for all the communist BS and that Jo and
lie would hypnotize them and win them
over to his side so a month later after
Wallace's insistence the Dixie mission
flew to Yen on this group was led by
Colonel David Barrett with none other
than John s service at his side they
landed in yen on on July 17th 1944 in
charge of the whole mission for the CCP
was Joe and Lai he was in charge of all
the negotiations details as well as
keeping sight of the big picture Joe and
Mao knew this wasn't going to amount to
much in the end but they gave it their
best Joe put together two teams the
first team included yet geunyang Huang
hua Qian Zhang
the immortal George Hatem Mahadev
himself they handled all non-military
affairs were in charge of answering
questions from the Dixie mission members
the second team at a few ccp military
heavyweights Punga wai-chun yi lin be ow
Niranjan and her long for something this
big joe had all his starters in the game
yet Jenny I'm at the Dixie mission when
they landed at the airport they were
wined and dined yen on style and got the
full treatment
Mao and joe lobbied barrett and serviced
personally for hours on end about
getting some US military aid joe
repeated again and again that the
communists were only willing to join
with the kmt to finish off japan if they
were respected as a partner jiang had
all along refused to allow this and
there's a little bit of an incentive to
give the americans something to
fulminate above joe did something that
done show King would do thirty-five
years later Joe made it known in so many
words that when this was all over China
was gonna need a lot of help to make
things right again and wouldn't it be
great if the Americans helped out now in
order to get all this preferential
treatment later Joe spoke about reaping
a rich harvest one day in China trade
and investment finance and construction
projects and of course China would much
rather be warm and cozy with the
Americans than the Soviets he was very
convincing
Joe had choreographed a masterful show
and when Barrett and services playing
disappeared into the northern shiny sky
there were high fives all around
Barrett and service had sent that
glowing comments about what a great
bunch of guys the commies were not to
mention how surprisingly helpful they
were with respect to military and
intelligence information in North China
then several months later in November
1944 the Patrick Hurley phase began Gyan
couldn't kick himself enough for
suggesting to Roosevelt that he send an
envoy to China to help with the
communication and allow him to go around
Stilwell once Hurley arrived
whatever hopes Joe and everyone else in
yeah non-han about possible american
cooperation went right up and smoked the
amazing thing was it all went up in
smoke but it kept on going for another
three years Joe tried to build a
relationship with Stilwell and reached
out to him but no sooner had they
started talking when Stilwell got
recalled you all remember that incident
Wallace came back from China and pulled
Marshall he had to recall Stilwell just
wasn't working out between him and John
and rather than listen to the vice
president Marshall instead put Stilwell
in charge of all armies in China over
Chiang kai-shek that led to a blow-up
that led to still while being recalled
to the US in October 1944 and replaced
with General Albert what a Meyer Joe and
I tried in vain to contact FDR via
letter but that of course didn't work
out no way that arrow was gonna be
allowed to make its mark this left the
CCP stranded and even though American
acceptance and cooperation was the
longest of long shots Joe still caught
hard to get it the only official links
to the US government were all decidedly
in the pocket of the KMT so 1945 and 46
the United States tried and tried to
bring about some sort of peace between
the KMT and CCP the more they try the
more they kept missing the mark Joe and
Mao knew the Americans were never gonna
come to their side if you recall Joe
head outmaneuvered the uninformed and
terribly naive Patrick Hurley when he
got Hurley to sign a five-point plan
that gave mile the one thing he had
always demanded independent control over
his armies Jang had never agreed to that
before and he wasn't agreeing to it now
so when Hurley left yen on went back to
try and sell the plan to Chung the
Generalissimo told him to go fly a kite
so Hurley had to go back to Joe and say
the whole thing needed to be
renegotiated this five-point plan
quickly became a dead horse that Mao
kept kicking for two years there
followed 43 days of talks
between both sides in Chongqing that led
nowhere there was bad faith all around
and everyone knew everyone was
double-dealing Hurley was being
downright belligerent because Moe and
Joe wouldn't agree with him
then once FDR died in April 1945 that
sure changed the dynamic no more free
ride for the KMT as soon as harry s
truman got all comfortable behind FDR's
old desk it became apparent to all he
wasn't a gem man around the time of
Roosevelt's death the 7th Congress of
the CCP took place the cheetah this was
the Congress were Mao beyond the shadow
of a doubt was made the top guy in the
Central Committee the Politburo in the
Military Council the new party
Constitution mentioned mouths name no
less than a hundred and five times when
it concluded the ranking of the party
went mile first leo cheese second
Trudeau third and Joe fourth not long
after the Japanese surrender Mao was
invited down to Chongqing for talks just
like with Leo Bay and trucco Liang Jung
had asked mile three times before he
agreed to come and this is where he
makes his first ever trip than an
airplane mile famously made Hurley who
was still up in Yin on fly down there
with him just in case any of John's
agents had any ideas to blow up the
plane Mao and John met face to face
eleven times always talking general
matters leaving all the details to Jo Jo
had gone to extraordinary lengths prior
to mouths arrival and during his stay in
Chongqing to make Mao out to be the
future statesman that he was with
respect to Mouse security that channels
available to communicate with him his
meals everything Joe made a big fuss in
front of everyone and put on a very fine
show as far as you know building up
Mao's face and Dignitas but for all the
major players in Chongqing you know Mao
was a little rough around the edges I
guess you could say you can take the man
out of shine but in Mao's case they
couldn't get the shine out of them
man Sojo choreographed everything so it
always put Mao in a in respected
dignified and sophisticated light seven
months after FDR died Patrick Hurley
still couldn't deliver on all his
promises to bring these two sides
together in the face of a long-running
diplomatic failure
Patrick Hurley resigned in a huff that
was all discussed in detail most Jon's
service episodes a few weeks after
Hurley left
General George Marshall arrived with
Marshall the US government was really
sending in some major firepower
he hadn't been immortalized yet with the
Marshall Plan but he was still a very
high-ranking and respected figure a lot
of hopes in the u.s. at least were
placed on the success of this mission
the Civil War was still ramping up
Marshall was trying to negotiate a
ceasefire as soon as Japan surrendered
mile gave the order to mobilize the Red
Army against young Joe drafted the order
known as directive number one it said
and I'm paraphrasing rush into Manchuria
and grant anything left behind by Japan
directives 2 to 7 gave instructions how
to deal with the surrendered Japanese
collaborators Soviet troops and others
by now the entire north of China was
honeycombed with red bases this is where
the undeclared civil war was first
starting Manchuria the vanquished
Japanese left a pretty massive vacuum
once they surrendered a month after it
was all over miles set up the North East
Bureau and put Poong John in charge
there Punk John of course will become
the first one to fall in the Cultural
Revolution but in September 1945 he was
mouths trusted man on the scene to
direct the CCP takeover of Manchuria by
year's end
lyndie I will have 280,000 troops under
his command there she hung to as soon as
her Lee threw in the towel rushed into
Manchuria aided by the US military who
airlifted all the necessary troops to
slow down Mao's big plans to get his
hands on all that nice equipment
the u.s. pulled out all the stops for
Chung and the Soviets did what they
could to ensure that whatever they found
went to the PLA the race was on
the United fronts were already ancient
history while all this was going on in
Manchuria Jo and I was of course given
the job of dealing with George Marshall
Jo flew to Chongqing to meet him on
December 22nd 1945 but at this juncture
and 1945 and into 1946 the PLA needed
some time to sort itself out there was a
quantum leap between Jing Gong Shan and
Ray Jean and where the CCP found itself
now they didn't have the upper hand yet
but it was starting to seem possible but
with Marshall in the picture for now
precious time was handed to the
Communists to get organized and take a
breather as far as Marshalls discussions
with Jo all the low-hanging fruit was
agreed to at the outset and things
started off on a hopeful note they met
six times between February and April
1946 but cease fires are tricky things
every time it seemed they had a deal in
fact they did not all throughout 1946
the KMT and CCP armies engaged in all
kinds of skirmishes in the northeast
linphea was a very busy guy in May 1946
the capital of the Republic of China was
moved back to Nanjing
that's where Jo resumed his discussions
with Marshall after all the easy stuff
was agreed to all the friendliness and
good chair had vanished the same old
issues kept coming up and both sides
were bending an inch in a telegram to Ma
On June 3rd Jo had to give ma the bad
news that Marshall had turned into
Patrick Hurley the second and there was
zero chance he was ever gonna side with
the CCP on anything
Marshall kept thinking at the end of
every session that both sides were gonna
pull back from the brink but never did
the hostilities come to a halt
not with Manchuria at stake and all the
rich pickings sitting there waiting for
the first one to grab it Jang was not
shy at all
about defying Marshall then Joe would
rag on general Marshall that he was
incapable of controlling jamming in the
end an exasperated Marshall announced
that all American equipment on the
ground in China belong to Chiang
kai-shek's Nationalist Army both Mao and
Joe saw that on one hand the US was
trying to broker a truce between two
parties but on the other hand they were
only supplying military aid to one side
on October 9 my old Joe to get back to
Yen on November 19th 1946 Joe packed up
and the entire delegation got on a plane
and flew back to Yen on mal had always
known all this talk with the Americans
would lead to naught and in the end he
was proved right the Americans at this
point seemed pretty sure that the now
rebranded since July PLA would have no
chance against John's massive armies
backed with American military support
and besides this ideologically Mao and
the Americans both knew the USA was
incapable of making this leap of faith
to give the CCP a chance not that a line
in the sand needed to be drawn but young
attacked and took the CCP stronghold of
Jiang choco on October 11th at the same
time he called for a new constitutional
assembly and you'll never believe who
didn't get invited to be part of this
new government so Mao Zedong told Joe
and I to come back the diplomacy phase
of the war had run its course
at this juncture Mao needed Joe the
military advisor not Joe the diplomat
let me quote ah darn Weston in his book
decisive encounters describing Joe
during this period quote although a few
thoughts though at the time it was to be
Joe's longest stay behind enemy lines
it was also perhaps the end of the
period of his best service to his party
Joe's tactical skills the attractiveness
of his personality and his tremendous
ability for deception contributed much
toward the blossoming of interest in the
CCP in the city
during his 12-month stay in the KMT
capitals while many urban Chinese had
until Joe's arrival viewed the
Communists as a sect of rural fanatics
in 1946 they had been charmed by the
energetic propagandist and his young
assistants and to giving the CCP the
benefit of the doubt as the civil war
progressed these changes were to have
great significance end quote
once John had all these American weapons
tanks and equipment given the size of
his armies and the state of the PLA he
was at the peak of his power
Japan God Soviets vacated the premises
he was in charge now I don't know what
jung kai-shek was thinking in the summer
of 1946 he had been trying for 20 years
to get rid of these guys and each time
he came in for the kill fate had always
intervened to stay his hand or interfere
with his careful plans he had to finish
them off this time or else he himself
was finished
Joe was Mao's vice chairman of the
Military Council as well as chief of
general staff this pretty much made Joe
on the org chart
Maya's right-hand man for the remainder
of the Civil War the battle was on Liddy
I was in the North commanding Army's
Chagny was in Shandong from past
episodes we remember how this all went
but let's just skim through it again
into the second half of 1946 and clear
through into the summer Jiang's military
went on the offensive and gave it to the
PLA but good towns were taken back and
more often than not miles armies had to
retreat from such overwhelming force
when the nationalist army turned their
attention to yen on Joe had plenty of
advance notice to plan the evacuation
this had been his job back in 1934 after
the fifth and circle mid campaign began
Joe planned and led the evacuation of
raegene now they had to do it again Joe
was very intent on having
go a little smoother actually Joe had a
spy in the nationalist general who'd
song nuns office who tipped them off
so they knew well in advance what was
coming and how big of a force would be
attacking yen on it served party centre
well since the end of the long march in
1935 it was time to move on now but as
Mao said to Joe as they left on March 14
1947 quote will give John Jana he will
give us China and quote those two Ling
dal were the last to leave next stop was
further to the north of Shaanxi in a
village called Sal lingo here Mao and
Joe mapped out the plan Joe divided
everyone up into three committees the
front committee would be Mao Joe and red
be sure they directed all military ops
and told everyone what to do the central
working committee led by Leo Xiao Qi and
Lin Bo took orders from the front
committee and based themselves in
northeast Shaanxi province the rear
committee also went to Xiang XI along
with most of the Central Committee and
one of their roles was to keep the CCP
going in the event something happened to
Mao or the other top leaders dummying
Chou went with this group
the other thing put in place mal called
the Kunlun detachment they were run by
the front committee Joe divided this
Quinlan attachment into four groups
military affairs Intel radio
communications and the Xinhua news
agency Joe and Lai himself would ride
from committee to committee by horseback
keeping the communications tight I know
we always pictured Joe and Lai
impeccably dressed in his mouth so
elegance meeting foreign dignitaries
performing his role as premier and
diplomat but as I said on and off since
about 1927 Joe had always been someone
traveling in disguise walking dark
alleys at night to clandestine meetings
traveling incognito with his head down
avoiding detection and here in 1947 on
the back of a horse liaison with the
key people leading this revolution he
was this hybrid that was part tally ran
and met her Nick and Che Guevara from
these northern bases the PLA played a
game of cat-and-mouse
striking whenever the nationalist troops
fell into their traps on May 4th
Punda why hit the jackpot when a raid at
pan long Chen yielded forty thousand
army uniforms and over a million pieces
of equipment 1947 sure started off good
for John but by the fall of that year he
was already starting to sing where of
all the good times gone side by side Mao
and Joe worked together directing
operations and managing the war they
made a good team by the end of 1947 Joe
and I was able to announce to everyone
that the war had finally reached a
tipping point and the CCP would soon be
on the offensive for the first time
since all this began thirty-two percent
of China was under CCP hands the PLA had
swelled now to 2.2 million soldiers and
not only this
besides the military strength Joe had
invested over the years and software too
so hard he had worked to develop the so
called second front these were students
and intellectuals mostly who maybe
weren't party members but were on board
with the Communist agenda that
investment started to yield dividends in
the form of protests and expressions of
popular discontent against the
government Jiang was already dealing
with a stronger-than-expected PLA
economic collapse and now popular
outrage across a wide swath of society
well 1948 was gonna get a lot worse for
the Nationalists and the crescendo will
build until about the failure of the
gold yen and the launch of the Liao Shan
campaign for Joe and the top leadership
the balance of the Civil War was going
to be managed from the town of XI by
Paul this was about a two-day march to
the northwest of sure Chuang and Hebei
they moved in there April 1948 and it
was
she by paw were Mau and Joe directed the
balance of the civil war that liao shun
quite high and pingjin campaigns were
all run out of this base January 21st
1949 Chiang kai-shek stepped down and
lead song ran replaced him as president
during one of the darkest if not the
darkest moment in kmt history now they
had been reduced to reaching out to the
ccp for some kind of deal mal gave him
his terms at January 14th what followed
was I guess payback for all those years
going back to the time the CCP had been
founded they had been harassed
intimidated murdered unmask assassinated
and chased all over China the Communists
after every disastrous turn of events
kept coming back and each time he almost
had them in a corner all these outside
forces kept foiling Jung's plans the
Russians the Japanese the Americans the
xi'an incident after john resigned as
presidents he went to his hometown in
chico just outside of Ningbo there he
reflected on his life and the failures
that surely history would pin on him it
was no more mr. nice guy when joe and
lie face down as KMT opponents upon the
commencement of peace negotiations on
April 1st so many years Joe had faced
these men as an inferior now he faced
them as a conqueror and handed them very
harsh terms of surrender on April 15th
he told them they had five days to
consider and it was take it or leave it
and if they didn't accept the PLA would
cross the jung-soo and finish them off
in the South the north of China already
belonged to the Communists April 20th
Jang and Li Tong Ren rejected chose
offer and sure enough just as advertised
Mao called for the PLA to cross the yang
su in April 23rd they captured the
capital Nanjing you might remember from
that dumb Xiao ping episode part 2 this
was the moment dung and China
yiii after taking nanjing got to have
some fun and goof on John kai-shek by
taking turns sitting at his desk in the
presidential palace at this point
1948-1949 there was no question anymore
whether the Communists would come out on
top it was just a matter of when and by
mid 1949 the end was safely in sight
setting up a new government after
decades of destruction and turmoil and a
national scale is one of those things
that's harder than you think here again
Joanne live rose to the occasion and
stepped up to spearhead this gargantuan
task years later the leaders would all
say they hadn't expected to win so
quickly when Joe announced that a
tipping point had been reached in
December 1947 a need suddenly arose to
start planning for what if and when
winning the war and losing the peace was
not with Joe or any of the leadership
wanted so just like Jefferson Adams
Franklin Hamilton Jay Madison and others
had to do in the late 18th century with
the USA so Joe and I had to do miles had
um thought was one thing but it wasn't
gonna help with the administration and
management of the country Joe had to
start planning for that he didn't do it
alone but he was the main guy Joe knew
the particular importance that foreign
relations were gonna play once the new
nation was established early on Joe had
started grooming all kinds of future MFA
personnel there were a lot of people who
traveled with Joe and were his
assistants over the years he could learn
a lot having Joe and lye as a boss I
often say Joe did this Joe did that and
Joe met with this person it wasn't Joe
and I by himself all the time someone is
important and high-profile as Joe always
traveled with an entourage
many of these people seeded the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs PK Banerjee India's
charge a DA Fair in Beijing during the
sino-indian dust-up in October November
1962 once wrote a book about Joe and Lai
he had said quote one could always tell
whether a man or a woman
was trained by Joe and lie to begin with
he or she is a workaholic
secondly never will that person be
slipshod in anything whatever he or she
does is a total commitment end quote so
all throughout the climax of the Civil
War and into the mop-up phase
Joe and I was drafting the blueprints
for the new Chinese state while the
bullets were still flying the outline
for the common program that served as
the first constitution of the PRC was
put together Joe gave an interesting
speech on May 7 1949 at the National
Youth Congress although the speech was
called learned from Mao Zedong the
content involved a dire warning against
the deification of the Chairman Joe said
quote you must not regard Mao as a
chance leader a born leader a demigod if
you do it will be empty talk
making Mao a deity apart that's the kind
of leader publicized and futile and
capitalist societies our leader is born
of the Chinese people born of China's
revolution in learning from Mao Zedong
we must learn in the light of his own
historical development not just looking
at his great achievement today and
neglecting the process of his growth
while Zedong was superstitious in
childhood but yesterday's superstitious
child was able to become today's
Chairman Mao his greatness lies in the
fact that he dared to face up to the
past end quote
no wonder that speech didn't get
published till 1978 somewhere along the
line everything with respect to this new
Chinese state had to be made official
once the Nationalists were having their
going-out-of-business sale in the
mainland someone needed to set things
straight for all it was decided the best
way to start off would be with something
akin to what happened in 1945 after the
war ended when a political consultative
Congress was created that included
several parties Joe was put in charge
naturally of the Preparatory Committee
the first of what soon came to be known
as the CPPCC or Chinese People's
Political Consultative Conference was
held September 21st to the 30th 1949
Joe invited the KMT to participate and
become part of the new China as one
party among many the CCP was the only
one that counted but this forum was one
where non CCP organizations could have a
voice in China's future the meeting was
held with 134 members representing 23
organizations and 8 Democratic parties
at this first CPPCC meeting they made a
few big decisions they settled on the
name of People's Republic of China the
Chinese flag the national anthem and the
first slate of government leaders were
announced it was also announced that the
capital was being moved to Beijing and
that the place wasn't called bei ping
anymore and then on the very next day
after the conference closed on the last
day of September Mao stood on Tiananmen
and declared the founding of the new
China man that was one hard slog I
wonder if ma was thinking about that
night more than 28 years ago when the
first Party Congress was held right
where she India's today a Shanghai and
how they all had to scatter and finish
the meeting at a tour boat on South Lake
and Jia Xing he had been on the run on
and off ever since and now came this
great day he wouldn't have made it this
far without Jo and live Jo stood there
with Mao to the side just to his laughed
when he said his famous words about
China standing up Jo was now 51 years
old and the new premier of the new China
Mao was 56 both men had 27 more years to
live and in part 5 we will at last look
at Jo and lie as he begins his
illustrious career as the premier of the
People's Republic of China as far as the
US and China were concerned once George
Marshall left in January 1947 there were
no friendly relations until Nixon opened
the door in 1972 Jo's early years his
france period the roles he played as an
up-and-comer in the nascent chinese
communist movement attracted the soviets
early on and they saw Jo and I was a
pretty sharp guy and this led to his
appointment
the Whampoa Military Academy there in
Guangdong province Joe began is long on
again off again
tortured relationship with Chiang
kai-shek then he also met mild Saddam
for the first time then for two decades
following the Shanghai Massacre Joe was
on the run hiding from Jung's secret
police and working undercover to keep
the party alive recruit new members and
infiltrate the KMT organs of power there
would be moments when Joe was able to
work openly the first and second United
France the Xian incident and when the
Americans came and tried in vain to
build a coalition government when Joe
and live walked onto the world stage in
the mid 1930s he at once built up quite
a nice reputation as a worthy diplomatic
opponent his reputation as an astute
helpful well-connected mild-mannered
nice guy however belied a side of Joe
that was dark indeed and kept
well-hidden he was loyal to the CCP
first and foremost during the three
decades of the 20s 30s and 40s that
demise of the party through violent
means almost happened when all seemed
lost or damaged beyond repair
Joe picked up the ball and kept things
alive at every moment of crisis during
these three turbulent decades Joe was
there in a leadership role and when an
act of revenge needed to be carried out
or murder committed Joe never hesitated
to give the order he never lost sight of
the big picture
if he personally had to leave a few
bodies in his wake and that decision was
nothing for Joe and I to make but he was
no mouths of dung that's for sure Joe
knew this too
despite his high ranking and the party
almost since the beginning he never
aspired to be number one he was more of
a grand chancellor type and in the
months leading up to the Tony Conference
when it came time for Joe to choose who
he thought would be best for the future
of the CCP he chose Mao Zedong Mao
didn't become the top guy all by himself
Joe made it easier
for Mao to get to the top of the pops
and once Joe said he supported Mao
those who were insurer were still
undecided
they too on the strength of their belief
in Joe and lies wisdom and experience
began to accept miles leadership Joe is
usually looked at in his capacity as the
consummate diplomat premier that's how I
and Manny best remember him the Geneva
Conference ban dong Nixon but he was
also a military man he wasn't like Judah
under Y or Chagny out fighting battles
though he fought in quite a few
he was Mao's right-hand man directing
the most crucial moments of the Civil
War
not only did he direct the course of the
war with mile he had to take on the
responsibility of what to do after the
guns were silent and Chung was defeated
it's hard enough starting up a company
let alone a nation with half a billion
people ravaged by 20 years of the most
savage warfare in almost a hundred years
of humiliating imperialism a lot of
stuff needed to be thought up from
scratch Mao was the theory guy Joe was
the practical nuts and bolts guy getting
China up and running was Joe's main job
so that's all for next time thinking of
a last-minute holiday gift how about my
pool arty gift set comes in a nice
package don't even have to gift wrap it
to 100 grand Paul chose a 2006 Cheung
par from the Hmong high tea factory of
Chi Chuan Bana and a 2015 show pool are
from the famous shaquan tea factory
located in dali yunnan province two of
the most renowned party factories
located in the land that brought this
great gift to the world as part of the
special deal worked out with mighty
friends at tea sense.com you also get
your choice of four designs of gyuhan's
and to pry the tea leaves from that nice
enjoyable healthy pool our tour cha
we're throwing in a free tea pick come
on man do it just like the pros you all
no doubt remember guy wants these are
covered tea bowls introduced during the
Ming Dynasty but became de rigueur
the ching go to tea sense.com and get
yours now
that's te a s e n z.com the perfect gift
for pou are lovers everywhere so many of
you write me and ask me how can i donate
to the chp you know something no need to
send me anything go check out my tea
just like Dan Karlin gets with his
Amazon search bar same with me on the
CHP who are tea gifts that get a little
piece of that and that allows the CHP to
keep going just a little bit longer so
go show some love
hey you also might want to check out
elias bell Haddad's new and noteworthy
history podcast available in the iTunes
Store and elsewhere the history of islam
podcast i've been listening
elias is covering pre-islamic Arabia
right now you can also find this at
history of islam podcast dot blog
spot.com dot uk' i'll have a link on my
website I'll be out in Paris end of
January any listeners out there want to
hook up and meet email me at Laszlo at
China History podcast.com honestly other
than a plane changing CDG 20 years ago
I've never been there before
can you believe it I heard there's still
a few copies left at the anthills
anthology while we're here you can get
it at Earnshaw books com
that's right the same one I said before
where you can find quality books on
China and beyond the anthill org writing
about China since even before the
Shibata I'm not promising anything but
I'm going to try and squeeze out one
last episode before this year 2015 comes
to an end gonna be up in northern Cal
next week so I'll be on the run on
behalf of the whole CHP team here all my
research interns assistants and PhDs
everyone in production and accounting
good old gums yet brings us the milk tea
3 p.m. like clockwork
this is Lazlo Montgomery beseeching you
to join me next time for another
exciting episode of the Chou Enlai
history podcast